---
title: Taylor Swift Through Stats
categories:
- General
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---

In this post, we want to know how her music has changed a small-town country artist to become one of the most recognized musicians/singer-songwriters of this generation. Through her songwriting, sound, and stanza, witness how she used to believe that love was burning red but it's golden like daylight.

## Who's Taylor Swift, Anyway?

Hi all. Before we dwell into the musical intricacies of Taylor Swift, we have to know her. There are three main things that can define her: 

1. Owner of `Love Story` and other songs from `Fearless`.
2. First woman to win Grammy Album of The Year three times.
3. Track number 5, easter eggs, and hidden vaults for each album.

Indeed, they were rare. We were there and we remembered them all too well.

## Our Data

For this project, data were gathered from different sources. We scraped the lyrics from [genius](https://genius.com/) through `genius` package by `R`. Only the standard versions were used so it has only **137** tracks. The songs used for movies and songs in deluxe version such as `Ours`, `Crazier`, and `Safe and Sound` were not there. The code is provided on the same repository under `codes` folder.

To add the songwriting and producing credits dataset, the track listing section of albums in [Wikipedia](https://www.wikipedia.org/) were scraped. Since all of them are in table-ready format and there are nine album, it can be copied and formatted with `Excel`. In this dataset, it has **146** tracks, excluding the track used in films and the bonus tracks from `Fearless`.

Finally, to get the audio features of each tracks across albums, `Python` codes from [Rare Loot](https://rareloot.medium.com/extracting-spotify-data-on-your-favourite-artist-via-python-d58bc92a4330) and `R` codes from [Simran Vatsa](https://medium.com/@simranvatsa5/taylor-f656e2a09cc3) were tweaked since the former retrieved only the first twenty-five album and the package does not distinguish between what is a full album and what is a single while the latter is deprecated in the latest version. Hence, the package `spotifyr` should be installed locally. Since all movie tracks and bonus tracks from `Speak Now` onwards were not included, we have **142** in all. By using `inner` join in all datasets, we have **137** tracks.

The clean versions of the datasets are in the `dataset` of the same repository. And that's how it works. That's how you get the data.

## Exploratory Data Analysis

As a first part of our [Taylor Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TaylorSeries.html), it was decided to analyze the dataset separately and use them altogether in the next installation. 

### Taylor Swift Through Songwriting

Taylor had solely written **42** out of **146** as of this dataset. Furthermore, she has solely penned all but one song in her `Speak Now` album. Among her co-writers, Jack Antonoff had written with her the most for **25** in which **9** of them were from `Lover`. As a pair, Max Martin and Shellback worked together for the lyrics in 20 instances, particularly the three singles from `Red` and almost half of the album from both `1989` and `reputation`, the album where the pop music is significantly shown. While Jack Antonoff had worked with **7** other writers across all albums `post-Red`, Max Martin and Shellback have **6** common connections among Taylor's other writers even they worked only on three albums.

| Songs Written 	| Liz Rose 	| Shellback 	| Max Martin 	| Jack Antonoff 	| Aaron Dessner 	|
|---------------	|----------	|-----------	|------------	|---------------	|---------------	|
| Taylor Swift  	| 7        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Fearless      	| 4        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Speak Now     	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Red           	| 1        	| 3         	| 3          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| 1989          	| 0        	| 8         	| 9          	| 3             	| 0             	|
| reputation    	| 0        	| 9         	| 9          	| 6             	| 0             	|
| Lover         	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 9             	| 0             	|
| folklore      	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 5             	| 9             	|
| evermore      	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 2             	| 13            	|

**Table 1.** Liz Rose and Jack Antonoff together have never written a Taylor Swift song.


{% include taylor_network_write.html %}

**Figure 1.** Max Martin and Jack Antonoff are the most sought after co-writers among Taylor Swift's co-writers.

On the other hand, she had co-produced **82** out of all tracks, in which **41** of those are with Nathan Chapman, her main producer from all albums before `1989` and **28** from Jack Antonoff across all albums from `1989` onwards. For the main producer in `evermore` Aaron Dessner, he has worked with her on the production side for **4** times. One interesting observation is that the three main producers never worked all together for a song. Also, Aaron and Jack worked only for `Betty` in `folklore`. As shown by the table below, Max Martin worked the most for the production of tracks in `1989`. 

| Songs Produced 	| Taylor Swift 	| Nathan Chapman 	| Max Martin 	| Jack Antonoff 	| Aaron Dessner 	|
|----------------	|--------------	|----------------	|------------	|---------------	|---------------	|
| Taylor Swift   	| 0            	| 11             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Fearless       	| 13           	| 13             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Speak Now      	| 17           	| 17             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Red            	| 10           	| 10             	| 3          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| 1989           	| 7            	| 1              	| 12         	| 3             	| 0             	|
| reputation     	| 6            	| 0              	| 9          	| 6             	| 0             	|
| Lover          	| 18           	| 0              	| 0          	| 11            	| 0             	|
| folklore       	| 7            	| 0              	| 0          	| 7             	| 11            	|
| evermore       	| 4            	| 0              	| 0          	| 1             	| 16            	|

**Table 2.** Taylor worked with four main producers across three genres of album.


{% include taylor_network_prod.html %}

**Figure 2.** All but a pair of producers from the debut are connected.

Among all connections, there is a single pair separated from the rest since they solely worked on `A Perfectly Good Heart` from the debut album.

After her debut album, she started in handling the production of the songs along with Nathan Chapman. After the success of `Fearless` and amid the criticisms that se got lucky because of other musicians in her album, she started owning both the writing and producing aspects of a song. As she transitioned to a more pop sounding era, she sought help from Max Martin and Shellback for great hooks as shown in `Blank Space` and `Shake It Off`. Hence, their collective cohesiveness had earned them another Grammy Album of the Year and the critics' approval in terms of year-end and decade-end polls. 

While `reputation` has relatively happier love songs, Taylor worked more with Antonoff and helped fully uncovered her feelings in `Lover` and `Daylight`as she had hinted songs about her current lover. The album `reputation` may be a catharsis for her state while `Lover` is the happier result of that. When the pandemic came, she and her supporters have a lot going on at the moment when Swift dropped `folklore` and `evermore` within a year. As the albums cater more to the lore-loving folks, she worked with Aaron Dessner for the lyrics and music. Once again, she has bagged another AOTY. 

What comes after `evermore` and her version of `Fearless`? Will she work again with `Nathan Chapman` or drop the last of the `folklore` trilogy? Anyway, are you ready for it?

### Taylor Swift Through Sound

To understand how her sound had changed as she wondered across three genres, the spotify audio features dataset was used. Only nine numeric features spanning three main characteristics such as _mood_, _properties_, and _context_. All except `loudness` and `tempo` have range of scores from **0** to **1**. The former typically ranged from **-60** to **0** while the latter is always non-negative. The first four will cover the first main characteristic while the last two is under _context_. The rest is under the second characteristic.

Before we dwell into the features, let us look at the key she used in recording the tracks. The major key is in **129** out of **142** while the rest, which is **13** is in minor key. Out of those **129**, only **22** of those are in C major, the people's key and key of [innocence and simplicity](https://americansongwriter.com/songwriter-u-on-c-major/). She has used this more extensively in her `Lover` album than other ones. The "B major", "D# major", "G minor" were only used once, in tracks produced by Aaron Dessner.

1. `Danceability` - how danceable or suitable for dancing a track is. The higher, the more danceable. `The Archer` and `I Think He Knows`, both from album `Lover`, have the lowest and highest score respectively in this metric.
2. `Valence` - how positive a track musically conveys. The higher, the more positive. `Delicate` from `reputation` and `Shake It Off` from `1989` have the extreme values.
3. `Energy` - how loud, fast, and noisy a track feels. The higher, the more intense it channels. `new year's day` exudes the lowest energy while `Haunted` from `Speak Now` exhibits the opposite.
4. `Tempo` - as measured in beats per minute, how fast a track is. The higher, the faster. `Soon You'll Get Better` and `Lover`, both from album `Lover`, have the highest and lowest score respectively in this metric.
5. `Loudness` - often correlated with `Energy`, it measures how loud a track is. The higher, the louder. `hoax` from `folklore` and `Picture To Burn` from the debut album occupy both extremes.
6. `Speechiness` - it measures the presence of spoken words in a track. The higher, the more significant a spoken word's presence is. While `Teardrops On My Guitar` garnered the lowest score, both `Stay Stay Stay` from `Red` and `I Forgot That You Existed` from `Lover` have the highest score.
7. `Instrumentalness` - it represents the amount of vocals in a track. The ooh's and aah's are counted as vocals. The closer to **1**, the greater likelihood that it has no vocal presence. **Fifty-seven** tracks have a score of zero while `long story short` from `evermore` has the highest score of **0.179**.
8. `Liveness` - it is a likelihood that a track is recorded with a live audience. The higher, the closer it is to a live track. `The Story Of Us` and `Back to December`, both from `Speak Now`, have the lowest and highest likelihoods, accordingly.
9. `Acousticness` - how acoustic a track is. The higher, the more acoustic it is. `State Of Grace` from `Red` has the lowest score while `It's Nice To Have a Friend` from `Lover` has the highest score.

From these metric, it can be observed that 6 of the "extreme" tracks came from the `Lover` album. Can it be said that it is the least cohesive album among the nine? To measure the cohesiveness of an album, we use [variance](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Variance.html) as a metric for each audio feature and rank each album according to the value. The idea is that an album has cohesion if the spread of audio features from each track are close to each other. Finally, we rank each album according to each feature and calculate its variance among all audio features. The album should be coherent in terms on how close the spread of the tracks for each audio feature and how close the spread the rank of these audio features. The closer to zero, the better.

|              	| danceability 	| energy 	| loudness 	| speechiness 	| acousticness 	| instrumentalness 	| liveness 	| valence 	| tempo 	| final_rank 	|
|--------------	|--------------	|--------	|----------	|-------------	|--------------	|------------------	|----------	|---------	|-------	|------------	|
| taylor swift 	| 1.0          	| 6.0    	| 2.0      	| 2.0         	| 6.0          	| 4.0              	| 6.0      	| 3.0     	| 4.0   	| 1.0        	|
| fearless     	| 7.0          	| 5.0    	| 5.0      	| 1.0         	| 3.0          	| 1.0              	| 7.0      	| 6.0     	| 8.0   	| 7.0        	|
| speak now    	| 3.0          	| 8.0    	| 7.0      	| 4.0         	| 8.0          	| 3.0              	| 9.0      	| 9.0     	| 2.0   	| 8.0        	|
| red          	| 2.0          	| 3.0    	| 4.0      	| 5.0         	| 2.0          	| 8.0              	| 4.0      	| 8.0     	| 3.0   	| 3.0        	|
| 1989         	| 6.0          	| 2.0    	| 1.0      	| 6.0         	| 4.0          	| 7.0              	| 5.0      	| 7.0     	| 6.0   	| 2.0        	|
| reputation   	| 4.0          	| 7.0    	| 6.0      	| 7.0         	| 7.0          	| 2.0              	| 8.0      	| 1.0     	| 7.0   	| 5.0        	|
| lover        	| 9.0          	| 9.0    	| 9.0      	| 9.0         	| 9.0          	| 6.0              	| 3.0      	| 4.0     	| 9.0   	| 4.0        	|
| folklore     	| 8.0          	| 4.0    	| 8.0      	| 3.0         	| 5.0          	| 5.0              	| 2.0      	| 2.0     	| 1.0   	| 6.0        	|
| evermore     	| 5.0          	| 1.0    	| 3.0      	| 8.0         	| 1.0          	| 9.0              	| 1.0      	| 5.0     	| 5.0   	| 9.0        	|

**Table 3.** Excluding the first album, `1989` is the most cohesive album although `evermore` has three most cohesive audio features and `Speak Now` has two.

From the table above, `Lover` has six features ranked as the least cohesive. For the other three features, their respective "chaos" have mixed well with others, hence, the album ranked fourth, just behind `1989` and `Red`. The biggest surprise is that even `evermore` has three features ranked as most cohesive and with Aaron Dessner producing all but one track, which is `gold rush` by Jack Antonoff. With that track, the other features, particularly `Speechiness` and `Instrumentalness` widen the spread among them. Thus, the aforementioned album ranked last in terms of cohesiveness.

It is known that her fifth track has her most emotionally vulnerable sound. Does it translate easily to the sound features. We tabulated the tracks with the lowest score for each album for each feature excluding `Instrumentalness`. 

| Album Name   | Danceability         | Energy                     | Loudness               | Speechiness            | Acousticness      | Liveness                | Valence           | Tempo               |
|--------------|----------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|
| taylor swift | cold as you          | invisible                  | teardrops on my guitar | teardrops on my guitar | the outside       | invisible               | invisible         | invisible           |
| fearless     | white horse          | white horse                | the best day           | superstar              | change            | jump then fall          | breathe           | jump then fall      |
| speak now    | long live            | never grow up              | last kiss              | dear john              | mine              | the story of us         | dear john         | sparks fly          |
| red          | come back... be here | sad beautiful tragic       | sad beautiful tragic   | stay stay stay         | state of grace    | i knew you were trouble | the last time     | begin again         |
| 1989         | this love            | clean                      | this love              | welcome to new york    | out of the woods  | how you get the girl    | this love         | this love           |
| reputation   | end game             | new year's day             | new year's day         | don't blame me         | getaway car       | king of my heart        | delicate          | i did something bad |
| lover        | the archer           | it's nice to have a friend | soon you'll get better | afterglow              | i think he knows  | you need to calm down   | the archer        | lover               |
| folklore     | exile                | hoax                       | hoax                   | betty                  | this is me trying | mirrorball              | my tears ricochet | exile               |
| evermore     | tolerate it          | champagne problems         | champagne problems     | no body, no crime      | no body, no crime | tolerate it             | happiness         | tolerate it         |

**Table 4.** Seven out of nine Track Five songs occupied **12** of the seventy-two positions.

The `Valence` feature highlights how most of them are fifth tracks. Furthermore, her outros and those fifth tracks occupy most positions. Hence, it could be an important feature in determining whether a track is a fifth track or not. Based on these score, the producers in her first and ninth album have put the softest, slowest, and least intense sound among **four** different tracks. After all, both albums have are almost exclusively produced by one person, Nathan Chapman and Aaron Dessner, respectively.


{% include taylor_sound_scatterplot.html %}

**Figure 3.** The bottom left quarter and the lower quarter of the graph is filled with most fifth tracks and outros.

In general, as shown by this scatter plot, the spread has widened across albums as she produced more radio-friendly sons. To see how she moved from genre to genre, an animated version will be shown later. One great observation is that a sonical catharsis happened between `reputation` and `Lover`. After all, she has articulated her experiences more and experienced better things as shown by her more positive-sounding music.


{% include taylor_sound_scattermove.html %}

**Figure 4.** The biggest change in spread occurred between `reputation` and `Lover`.

For the next set of figures, we looked how her features have interacted across album. With that, we used (correlation)[https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Correlation.html] matrix to describe how features are associated. The closer the absolute value to 1, the better association. For example, a score of **0.77** between `Valence` and `Energy` signify a track that sounds more positive is most likely an energetic one. One observation from the description of features is that while `Energy` and `Loudness` are positively associated with each other, both are negatively associated with `Acousticness`.


{% include taylor_sound_heatmap.html %}

**Figure 5.** The `Danceability` and `Energy` in her songs are almost not associated with each other.

Over-all, she wrapped her more energetic and pop-sounding songs in a more positive music as shown by most of her singles released before the full albums. In the beginning, she, her guitar, and Nathan Chapman have stamped her identity as a country artist. It is evident when she created `Our Song` and `A Picture To Burn`


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_taylorswift.html %}

**Figure 6.** The `Energy-Valence` and `Loudness-Valence` association scores are the highest across all albums.

After the debut album, she started producing more radio-friendly songs and incorporating other instruments as evident by the decrease in both negatively associated pairs.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_fearless.html %}

**Figure 7.** The `Danceability-Valence` and association score have dipped from **0.28** to **-0.06**, indicating a wider sonical spread.

After her success of the previous album, she started handling both writing and producing aspects and added some rock sensibilities to her identity as a country-pop artist. Her sound have become less chaotic from this graph. One change from her previous album is that the `Tempo-Loudness` correlation is **0.002** from **-0.407** of `Fearless`. This is evident by `Dear John`, `Back to December`, and `Sparks Fly`.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_speaknow.html %}

**Figure 8.** All but **3** associations scores have absolute values of more than **0.1**.

From `Red`,she has started working with Max Martin and released more danceable songs such as `22`. Based on the scatter plot, the respective `valence` did not have a significant change. Furthermore, she has added more instrumentals with her song such as `Sad Beautiful Tragic` and `Holy Ground`.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_red.html %}

**Figure 9.** The Association between `loudness` and `instrumentalness` have dipped from **0.16** of `Speak Now` to this album's **-0.80**.

If `Red` is a transition album, then `1989` is the full pop album. With Max Martin working for most of the tracks, the `danceability` of the tracks moved to the right. As shown by the heatmap below, the features under _mood_ characteristic have closer score, signifying similar moods across all tracks. Hence, the definition of cohesion by critics might be similar to ours and Spotify's. 


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_1989.html %}

**Figure 10.** The scores among features in _mood_ characteristic are closer than other scores in this album.

While `1989` has more cohesive mood than `reputation` as signified by the scores, the `danceability` and `valence` scores have a narrower distribution. Indeed, the old Taylor cannot come to the phone right because she is dead.


{% include ts_sound_violin_valence.html %}

**Figure 11.** The scores for all tracks in `reputation` have a narrower spread than the previous album.

After the pre-catharsis that is `reputation`, her sound in `Lover` have become more chaotic in terms of the features based on the scatterplot. As shown by `Paper Rings`, `Daylight` and `I Think He Knows`, the louder the sound, the more valent it is.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_lover.html %}

**Figure 12.** Excluding the highly associated scores by definition, the highest association score is between `Loudness` and `Valence`.

From `Lover` to `folklore`, fewer producers have worked on the album and that resulted to more cohesve features as shown by **Table 3**. Furthermore, the album focused on using more guitars to include the alternative music fans.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_folklore.html %}

**Figure 13.** Excluding `danceability` and `speechiness`, the association scores with `acousticness` are negative.

Finally with `evermore`, the spread of `liveliness` have narrowed, indicating that most of the tracks have that similar recorded feel.


{% include ts_sound_violin_liveness.html %}

**Figure 14.** The spread of `liveness` is the least for `evermore` album.

Hence, we have seen how she moved from country to pop to alternative from the audio features. To create the graphs with your customized colors and save it in a file less than 3 MBs since it is the maximum size you can upload, the code block from `plotly` can help.

```python
import plotly.express as px
your_figure_plotly = px.scatter(df, x="col_x", y="col_y", color="col_color",color_discrete_map=album_color_dictionary,
             title="Your Title")
your_figure_plotly.write_html("your_figure_plotly.html",include_plotlyjs="cdn")
```

Would she be searching for a sound we hadn't heard before? We will find out in April 9.

### Taylor Swift Through Stanza

Taylor Swift is known for writing, specifically about love. She got a long list of experiences
