---
title: Treading Through Taylor's Tracks
categories:
- General
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---

As a third part of our [Taylor Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TaylorSeries.html), we want to check what songs are sonically and lyrically connected. With that we will use the audio features from Spotify and the created lexical ratios based on our [first blog](https://sonic-edgehog.github.io/general/2021/04/04/ts-blog-001/). For the full codes and implementation, see the corresponding notebook `ts_liners.ipynb` in the [codes](https://github.com/sonic-edgehog/sonic-edgehog.github.io/tree/main/codes) folder.

{% include lib/mathjax.html %}

## Searching for Sonical Similarity

To check how sonically close are her songs, we standardized the features extracted from Spotify and from the 167 songs, we created a distance matrix using the euclidean distance. The metric is defined as follows. The closer the value to 0, the more sonically similar are the songs. In our code block we will use below, we will find the pair that produces the minimum value, which means that pair has the most sonical similarity.

$$ 
\begin{aligned}
distance = \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{N} (x_{i} - y_{i})^{2}}
\end{aligned}
$$

To create the distance matrix, we used the following codeblock.

```python
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import pairwise_distances
from scipy.spatial.distance import cosine
sound_feature_array = ts_sound_standard['features_list'].values.tolist()
ts_songs_all = ts_sound_standard['song_album'].values.tolist()
cos_sim = pairwise_distances(sound_feature_array, metric = "euclidean")
cos_sim = pd.DataFrame(cos_sim, index=ts_songs_all, columns=ts_songs_all)
```

From the matrix itself, we will identify the 20 most similar and dissimilar pair of tracks across the discography and for that, we used the following code blocks to generate the list. For the most similar tracks, Christopher Rowe, the main producer from `Fearless (Taylor's Version)` is able to replicate properly what Nathan Chapman has produced from the old version of `Fearless`. Furthermore, the top pair has both Max Martin and Shellback as the producers and Martin as the co-writer, indicating his heavy influence in `1989`.

{% include ts_sonic_top20_pair.html %}

**Table 1.**  Although eleven pairs came from both versions of `fearless` in which **seven** are re-recordings, a pair of songs from `1989` tops the list.

As for the most dissimilar tracks, `long story short` from `evermore` occupy 14 of the 20 pairs and it is the furthest track from the origin, followed by `gold rush` from the same album. Based on the first blog, `evermore` has the least cohesive tracks hence the dissimilar pairs came from that album.

{% include ts_sonic_bot20_pair.html %}

**Table 2.** The top three furthest tracks are least one of the members of the twenty most dissimilar pairs.

## Looking for Lyrical Likeliness

As for the lyrics of the tracks, we will proceed in two ways. We will use the lyrics themselves and we will clean them afterwards by removing common words. Furthermore, we will rank them according to how likely the lyrics and the choruses are, respectively. 

The idea is to measure the songs by their closeness. Hence, we apply a `jaccard` distance to the `lyric_set` for each. Then, we convert them into graph based on a particular threshold. The `jaccard` distance is defined as such where `A` and `B` are sets. The closer to zero, the nearer. The distance determines how similar a pair of unique set of words.

$$ 
\begin{aligned}
distance = 1- \frac{|A \cap B|}{|A \cup B|}
\end{aligned}
$$

The challenge in creating a matrix of jaccard distance is converting the a column of set of words into arrays hence we used `MultiLabelBinarizer`.

```python
from sklearn.preprocessing import MultiLabelBinarizer
mlb = MultiLabelBinarizer()
lyric_feature_array = ts_lyrics_song['lyric_set'].values.tolist()
ts_songs_all = ts_lyrics_song['song_album'].values.tolist()
ts_songs_record = mlb.fit_transform(lyric_feature_array)
jac_sim = pairwise_distances(ts_songs_record, metric = "jaccard")
jac_sim = pd.DataFrame(jac_sim, index=ts_songs_all, columns=ts_songs_all) 
```

We had the similar approach as the aforementioned method. For that, we rank those pairs in two ways, their clean and unclean lyrics. Furthermore, to strip the words to its essentials, we remove the common words and rank them as well.

To remove duplicate pairs and the diagonals, we had the codeblock for that

```python
jac_sim_final = jac_sim.stack().reset_index()
jac_sim_final.columns = ['source','sink','value']
jac_sim_final = jac_sim_final[jac_sim_final['source'] != jac_sim_final['sink']]
jac_sim_final.reset_index(inplace=True,drop=True)
jac_sim_final = jac_sim_final[pd.DataFrame(np.sort(jac_sim_final[['source','sink']].values,1)).duplicated()]
jac_sim_final.reset_index(inplace=True,drop=True)
```

If we take every word as part of the lyrics, we noticed that majority of the 20 most lyrically likely came from `fearless` and `1989` while the 20 pairs of most discordant lyrics came from `lover` and `folklore`. The former pair of albums were involved with major pop songwriting while that latter are mainly categorized as pop and alternative. Hence, that caused the parity and disparity.


{% include ts_lyric_top20_pair_unso.html %}

**Table 3.**  `breathe` from `fearless` and `all you had to do was stay` from `1989` are the most common tracks in the top 20 pairs.

{% include ts_lyric_bot20_pair_unso.html %}

**Table 4.**  `it's nice to have a friend` from `lover` and `epiphany` from `folklore` are the most common tracks in the bottom 20 pairs.

After removing the common stop words, two songs have become more prevalent across extremes. `we are never ever getting back together` from `red` now replaced `breathe` from `fearless` as the most common track across the top 20 similar pairs. Meanwhile, the discordance of lyrics of `epiphany` from `folklore` has become more prevalent as it occupied the top 2 to seven pairs. Furthermore, `evermore` and `folklore` are composed of different short stories thus adding the complexity of the terms. What is noticeable is that `champagne problems` from `evermore`, the most lyrically complex among her tracks is not in the most discordant pairs.


{% include ts_lyric_top20_pair_clso.html %}

**Table 5.**  The majority of the pairs came from `fearless taylor's version` or `red`.

{% include ts_lyric_bot20_pair_clso.html %}

**Table 6.**  Majority of the pairs came from `evermore` and `folklore`


### Ranking Relevant Records

Once we have the respective top 20s for the sound, clean and unclean version, we will have the top five pairs and declare those as the most similar tracks. With that, we will combine the common pairs and add their respective ranks for final touches.

{% include ts_similarity_data.html %}

**Table 7.**  The pairs have become more discordant after removing stop words.
