---
title: Taylor Swift Through Stats
categories:
- General
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---

In this post, we want to know how her music has changed a small-town country artist to become one of the most recognized musicians/singer-songwriters of this generation. Through her songwriting, sound, and stanza, witness how she used to believe that love was burning red but it's golden like daylight.

## Who's Taylor Swift, Anyway?

Hi all. Before we dwell into the musical intricacies of Taylor Swift, we have to know her. There are three main things that can define her: 

1. Owner of `Love Story` and other songs from `Fearless`.
2. First woman to win Grammy Album of The Year three times.
3. Track number 5, easter eggs, and hidden vaults for each album.

Indeed, they were rare. We were there and we remembered them all too well.

## Our Data

For this project, data were gathered from different sources. We scraped the lyrics from [genius](https://genius.com/) through `genius` package by `R`. Only the standard versions were used so it has only **137** tracks. The songs used for movies and songs in deluxe version such as `Ours`, `Crazier`, and `Safe and Sound` were not there. The code is provided on the same repository under `codes` folder.

To add the songwriting and producing credits dataset, the track listing section of albums in [Wikipedia](https://www.wikipedia.org/) were scraped. Since all of them are in table-ready format and there are only **nine** albums, they can be copied and formatted with `Excel`. In this dataset, it has **146** tracks, excluding the track used in films and the bonus tracks from `Fearless`.

Finally, to get the audio features of each tracks across albums, `Python` codes from [Rare Loot](https://rareloot.medium.com/extracting-spotify-data-on-your-favourite-artist-via-python-d58bc92a4330) and `R` codes from [Simran Vatsa](https://medium.com/@simranvatsa5/taylor-f656e2a09cc3) were tweaked since the former retrieved only the first twenty-five album and the package does not distinguish between what is a full album and what is a single while the latter is deprecated in the latest version. Hence, the package `spotifyr` should be installed locally. Since all movie tracks and bonus tracks from `Speak Now` onwards were not included, we have **142** in all. By using `inner join`i n all datasets, we have **137** tracks.

The clean versions of the datasets are in the `dataset` of the same repository. And that's how it works. That's how you get the data.

## Exploratory Data Analysis

As a first part of our [Taylor Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TaylorSeries.html), it was decided to analyze the dataset separately and use them altogether in the next installation. 

### Taylor Swift Through Songwriting

Taylor had solely written **42** out of **146** as of this dataset. Furthermore, she had solely penned all but one song in her `Speak Now` album. Among her co-writers, Jack Antonoff had written with her the most for **25** in which **9** of them were from `Lover`. As a pair, Max Martin and Shellback worked together for the lyrics in **20** instances, particularly the three singles from `Red` and almost half of the album from both `1989` and `reputation`, the album where the pop music is significantly shown. While Jack Antonoff had worked with **7** other writers across all albums `post-Red`, Max Martin and Shellback have **6** common connections among Taylor's other writers even they worked only on three albums. For the `R` version of the graph, please click to this [link](https://rpubs.com/sonic_the_edgehog/753804).

| Songs Written 	| Liz Rose 	| Shellback 	| Max Martin 	| Jack Antonoff 	| Aaron Dessner 	|
| :--------------	|---------:	|----------:	|-----------:	|--------------:	|--------------:	|
| Taylor Swift  	| 7        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Fearless      	| 4        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Speak Now     	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Red           	| 1        	| 3         	| 3          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| 1989          	| 0        	| 8         	| 9          	| 3             	| 0             	|
| reputation    	| 0        	| 9         	| 9          	| 6             	| 0             	|
| Lover         	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 8             	| 0             	|
| folklore      	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 5             	| 9             	|
| evermore      	| 0        	| 0         	| 0          	| 2             	| 13            	|

**Table 1.** Liz Rose and Jack Antonoff together have never written a Taylor Swift song.


{% include taylor_network_write.html %}

**Figure 1.** Max Martin and Jack Antonoff are the most sought after co-writers among Taylor Swift's co-writers.

On the contrary, she had co-produced **82** out of all tracks, in which **41** of those are with Nathan Chapman, her main producer from all albums before `1989` and **28** from Jack Antonoff, who worked across all albums from `1989` onwards. In fact, Chapman produced `This Love` in `1989`. For the main producer in `evermore` Aaron Dessner, he has worked with her on the production side for only **4** times. One interesting observation is that the three main producers never worked all together for a song. Specifically, Aaron and Jack have collaborated for the production of `Betty` in `folklore` and lyrics of `ivy` from `evermore`. As shown by the table below, Max Martin worked the most for the production of tracks in `1989`. 

| Songs Produced 	| Taylor Swift 	| Nathan Chapman 	| Max Martin 	| Jack Antonoff 	| Aaron Dessner 	|
| :--------------	|-------------:	|---------------:	|-----------:	|--------------:	|--------------:	|
| Taylor Swift   	| 0            	| 11             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Fearless       	| 13           	| 13             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Speak Now      	| 17           	| 17             	| 0          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| Red            	| 10           	| 10             	| 3          	| 0             	| 0             	|
| 1989           	| 7            	| 1              	| 12         	| 3             	| 0             	|
| reputation     	| 6            	| 0              	| 9          	| 6             	| 0             	|
| Lover          	| 18           	| 0              	| 0          	| 11            	| 0             	|
| folklore       	| 7            	| 0              	| 0          	| 7             	| 11            	|
| evermore       	| 4            	| 0              	| 0          	| 1             	| 16            	|
| Fearless (TS)  	| 25           	| 0              	| 0          	| 4             	| 2             	|

**Table 2.** Taylor worked with four main producers across three genres of album.


{% include taylor_network_prod.html %}

**Figure 2.** All but a pair of producers from the debut album are connected.

Among all connections, there is a single pair separated from the rest since they solely worked on `A Perfectly Good Heart` from the debut album. To use the `R` version, please check the link [here](https://rpubs.com/sonic_the_edgehog/753804).

After her debut album, she started handling the production of the songs along with Nathan Chapman. After the success of `Fearless` and amid the criticisms that she got lucky because of other musicians in her album, she started owning both the writing and producing aspects of a song. As she transitioned to a more pop sounding era, she sought help from Max Martin and Shellback for great hooks as shown in `Blank Space` and `Shake It Off`. Hence, their collective cohesiveness had earned them another Grammy Album of the Year and the critics' approval in terms of year-end and decade-end polls. 

While `reputation` has relatively happier love songs, Taylor worked more with Antonoff and helped fully uncovered her feelings in `Lover` and `Daylight` as she had hinted songs about her current lover. The album `reputation` may be a catharsis for her state while `Lover` is the happier result of that. When the pandemic came, she and her supporters have a lot going on at the moment when Swift dropped `folklore` and `evermore` within a year. As the albums catered more to the lore-loving folks, she worked with Aaron Dessner for the lyrics and music. Once again, she has bagged another AOTY. 

What comes after `evermore` and her version of `Fearless`? Will she work again with `Nathan Chapman` or drop the last of the `folklore` trilogy? Anyway, are you ready for it?

### Taylor Swift Through Sound

To understand how her sound had changed as she wandered across three genres, the spotify audio features dataset was used. Only nine numeric features spanning three main characteristics such as _mood_, _properties_, and _context_. All except `loudness` and `tempo` have range of scores from **0** to **1**. The former typically ranged from **-60** to **0** while the latter is always non-negative. The first four will cover the first main characteristic while the last two is under _context_. The rest is under the second characteristic.

Before we dwell into the features, let us look at the key she used in recording the tracks. The major key is in **129** out of **142** while the rest, which is **13** is in minor key. Out of those **129**, only **22** of those are in C major, the people's key and key of [innocence and simplicity](https://americansongwriter.com/songwriter-u-on-c-major/). She has used this more extensively in her `Lover` album than other ones. The "B major", "D# major", "G minor" were only used once, in tracks produced by Aaron Dessner.

1. `Danceability` - how danceable or suitable for dancing a track is. The higher, the more danceable. `The Archer` and `I Think He Knows`, both from album `Lover`, have the lowest and highest score respectively in this metric.
2. `Valence` - how positive a track musically conveys. The higher, the more positive. `Delicate` from `reputation` and `Shake It Off` from `1989` have the extreme values.
3. `Energy` - how loud, fast, and noisy a track feels. The higher, the more intense it channels. `new year's day` exudes the lowest energy while `Haunted` from `Speak Now` exhibits the opposite.
4. `Tempo` - as measured in beats per minute, how fast a track is. The higher, the faster. `Soon You'll Get Better` and `Lover`, both from album `Lover`, have the highest and lowest score respectively in this metric.
5. `Loudness` - often correlated with `Energy`, it measures how loud a track is. The higher, the louder. `hoax` from `folklore` and `Picture To Burn` from the debut album occupy both extremes.
6. `Speechiness` - it measures the presence of spoken words in a track. The higher, the more significant a spoken word's presence is. While `Teardrops On My Guitar` garnered the lowest score, both `Stay Stay Stay` from `Red` and `I Forgot That You Existed` from `Lover` have the highest score.
7. `Instrumentalness` - it represents the amount of vocals in a track. The ooh's and aah's are counted as vocals. The closer to **1**, the greater likelihood that it has no vocal presence. **Fifty-seven** tracks have a score of zero while `long story short` from `evermore` has the highest score of **0.179**.
8. `Liveness` - it is a likelihood that a track is recorded with a live audience. The higher, the closer it is to a live track. `The Story Of Us` and `Back to December`, both from `Speak Now`, have the lowest and highest likelihoods, accordingly.
9. `Acousticness` - how acoustic a track is. The higher, the more acoustic it is. `State Of Grace` from `Red` has the lowest score while `It's Nice To Have a Friend` from `Lover` has the highest score.

From these metrics, it can be observed that 6 of the "extreme" tracks came from the `Lover` album. Can it be said that it is the least cohesive album among the nine? Not really. To measure the cohesiveness of an album, we used [variance](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Variance.html) as a metric for each audio feature and ranked each album according to the value. The idea is that an album has cohesion if the spread of audio features from each track are close to each other. Finally, we ranked each album according to each feature and calculated the variances among all audio features. The album should be coherent in terms on how close the spread of the tracks for each audio feature and how close the spread the rank of these audio features. The closer to zero, the better.

To ensure that the tables are properly formatted, I used keys to associate the features with the following terms:

1. Danceability - A
2. Energy - B
3. Loudness - C
4. Speechiness - D
5. Acousticness - E
6. Instrumentalness - F
7. Liveness - G
8. Valence - H
9. Tempo - I

| Album        | A   | B   | C   | D   | E   | F   | G   | H   | I   | Final Rank |
|:-------------|----:|----:|----:|----:|----:|----:|----:|----:|----:|-----------:|
| taylor swift | 1.0 | 6.0 | 2.0 | 2.0 | 6.0 | 4.0 | 6.0 | 3.0 | 4.0 | 1.0        |
| fearless     | 7.0 | 5.0 | 5.0 | 1.0 | 3.0 | 1.0 | 7.0 | 6.0 | 8.0 | 7.0        |
| speak now    | 3.0 | 8.0 | 7.0 | 4.0 | 8.0 | 3.0 | 9.0 | 9.0 | 2.0 | 8.0        |
| red          | 2.0 | 3.0 | 4.0 | 5.0 | 2.0 | 8.0 | 4.0 | 8.0 | 3.0 | 3.0        |
| 1989         | 6.0 | 2.0 | 1.0 | 6.0 | 4.0 | 7.0 | 5.0 | 7.0 | 6.0 | 2.0        |
| reputation   | 4.0 | 7.0 | 6.0 | 7.0 | 7.0 | 2.0 | 8.0 | 1.0 | 7.0 | 5.0        |
| lover        | 9.0 | 9.0 | 9.0 | 9.0 | 9.0 | 6.0 | 3.0 | 4.0 | 9.0 | 4.0        |
| folklore     | 8.0 | 4.0 | 8.0 | 3.0 | 5.0 | 5.0 | 2.0 | 2.0 | 1.0 | 6.0        |
| evermore     | 5.0 | 1.0 | 3.0 | 8.0 | 1.0 | 9.0 | 1.0 | 5.0 | 5.0 | 9.0        |

**Table 3.** Excluding the first album, `1989` is the most cohesive album although `evermore` has three most cohesive audio features and `Speak Now` has two.

From the table above, `Lover` has six features ranked as the least cohesive. For the other three features, their respective "chaos" have mixed well with others, hence, the album ranked fourth, just behind `1989` and `Red`. The biggest surprise is that even `evermore` has three features ranked as most cohesive and with Aaron Dessner producing all but one track, which is `gold rush` by Jack Antonoff. With that track, the other features, particularly `Speechiness` and `Instrumentalness` widen the spread among them. Thus, the aforementioned album ranked last in terms of cohesiveness.

It is known that her fifth track has her most emotionally vulnerable sound. Does it translate easily to the sound features? We tabulated the tracks with the lowest score for each album for each feature excluding `Instrumentalness`.


{% include taylor_table_low_sound.html %}

**Table 4.** Seven out of nine Track Five songs occupied **12** of the seventy-two positions.

The `Valence` feature highlights how most of them are fifth tracks. Furthermore, her outros and those fifth tracks occupy most positions. Hence, it could be an important feature in determining whether a track is a fifth track or not. Based on these score, the producers in her first and ninth album have put the softest, slowest, and least intense sound among **four** different tracks. After all, both albums have are almost exclusively produced by one person, Nathan Chapman and Aaron Dessner, respectively.


{% include taylor_sound_scatterplot.html %}

**Figure 3.** The bottom left quarter and the lower quarter of the graph is filled with most fifth tracks and outros.

In general, as shown by this scatter plot, the spread widened across albums as she produced more radio-friendly songs. To see how she moved from genre to genre, an animated version will be shown later. One great observation is that a sonical catharsis happened between `reputation` and `Lover`. After all, she has articulated her experiences better and experienced nicer things as shown by her more positive-sounding music.


{% include taylor_sound_scattermove.html %}

**Figure 4.** The biggest change in spread occurred between `reputation` and `Lover`.

For the next set of figures, we looked at how the features have interacted across album. With that, we used [correlation](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Correlation.html) matrix to describe how features are associated. The closer the absolute value to 1, the better association. For example, a score of **0.77** between `Valence` and `Energy` signified that a track which sounds more positive is most likely an energetic one. One observation from the description of features is that while `Energy` and `Loudness` are positively associated with each other, both are negatively associated with `Acousticness`.


{% include taylor_sound_heatmap.html %}
**Figure 5.** The `Danceability` and `Energy` in her songs are almost not associated with each other.

Over-all, she wrapped her more energetic and pop-sounding songs in a more positive music as shown by most of her singles released before the full albums. In the beginning, she, her guitar, and Nathan Chapman have stamped her identity as a country artist. It is evident when she created `Our Song` and `A Picture To Burn`


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_taylorswift.html %}
**Figure 6.** The `Energy-Valence` and `Loudness-Valence` association scores are the highest across all albums.

After the debut album, she started producing more radio-friendly songs and incorporating other instruments as evident by the decrease in both negatively associated pairs.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_fearless.html %}
**Figure 7.** The `Danceability-Valence` and association score have dipped from **0.28** to **-0.06**, indicating a wider sonical spread.

After her success of the previous album, she started handling both writing and producing aspects and added some rock sensibilities to her identity as a country-pop artist. Her sound have become less chaotic from this graph. One change from her previous album is that the `Tempo-Loudness` correlation is **0.002** from **-0.407** of `Fearless`. This is evident by `Dear John`, `Back to December`, and `Sparks Fly`.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_speaknow.html %}
**Figure 8.** All but **3** associations scores have absolute values of more than **0.1**.

From `Red`, she collaborated with Max Martin and released more danceable songs such as `22`. Based on the scatter plot, the respective `valence` did not have a significant change. Furthermore, she has added more instrumentals with her song such as `Sad Beautiful Tragic` and `Holy Ground`.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_red.html %}
**Figure 9.** The Association between `loudness` and `instrumentalness` have dipped from **0.16** of `Speak Now` to this album's **-0.80**.

If `Red` is a transition album, then `1989` is the full pop album. With Max Martin working for most of the tracks, the `danceability` of the tracks moved to the right. As shown by the heatmap below, the features under _mood_ characteristic have closer scores, emphasizing similar moods across all tracks. Hence, the definition of cohesion by critics might be similar to ours and Spotify's. 


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_1989.html %}
**Figure 10.** The scores among features in _mood_ characteristic are closer than other scores in this album.

While `1989` has more cohesive mood than `reputation` as signified by the scores, the `danceability` and `valence` scores have a narrower distribution. Indeed, the music of old Taylor cannot come to the phone right because it is dead.


{% include ts_sound_violin_valence.html %}
**Figure 11.** In terms of `valence`, he scores for all tracks in `reputation` have a narrower spread than the previous album.

After the pre-catharsis that is `reputation`, her sound in `Lover` have become more chaotic in terms of the features based on the scatterplot. As shown by `Paper Rings`, `Daylight` and `I Think He Knows`, the louder the sound, the more valent it is. Maybe, `reputation` Taylor is wrong. What died didn't stay dead.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_lover.html %}
**Figure 12.** Excluding the highly associated scores by definition, the highest association score is between `Loudness` and `Valence`.

From `Lover` to `folklore`, fewer producers have worked on the album which resulted to more cohesve features as shown by **Table 3**. Furthermore, the album focused on using more guitars to include the alternative music fans.


{% include ts_sound_heatmap_folklore.html %}
**Figure 13.** Excluding `danceability` and `speechiness`, the association scores with `acousticness` are negative.

Finally with `evermore`, the spread of `liveliness` have narrowed, indicating that most of the tracks have that similar recorded feel.


{% include ts_sound_violin_liveness.html %}
**Figure 14.** The spread of `liveness` is the least for `evermore` album.

Hence, we have seen how she moved from country to pop to alternative based on audio features. To create the graphs with your customized colors and save it in a file less than 3 MBs since it is the maximum size you can upload, the code block from `plotly` can help.

```python
import plotly.express as px
your_figure_plotly = px.scatter(df, x="col_x", y="col_y", color="col_color",color_discrete_map=album_color_dictionary,
             title="Your Title")
your_figure_plotly.write_html("your_figure_plotly.html",include_plotlyjs="cdn")
```

Would she be searching for a sound we hadn't heard before? We will find out in April 9.

### Taylor Swift Through Stanza

Taylor Swift is known for writing, specifically about love. She got a long list of experiences to capture us like a fireworks show. To delve into how she used to held back words, no matter little they mean, to take words for what they are. To strip down to essentials, stop words, also known as common words and word contractions such as "I" and "She's", were removed. After that, the punctuations were wiped out, leaving us the words she used to whisper like in `Last Kiss` from `Speak Now`.

Among her songs, she used "like" the most. In fact, it appeared **418** times across **104** songs. For a writer known for her calamitious love and insourmountable grief, "love" appeared **238** times in **58** songs, which are both less than the appearance of "never" which is **309** times in **72** songs. I guess, she's the kind of girl who makes us sad.

We can tell a songwriter what her words worth by one, if the people are moved from the start and two, if they are hooked every time. Hence, an exploration of the choruses across her discography is done. For that, she used "know" **169** times in **36** songs. Once again, "never" is more frequent that "love" since the former is in **31** songs for **153** instances while the latter is in **28** tracks for **116** times.

To avoid confusion, the terms are used in these table.

1. word_freq - Number of times a word is used in a song
2. song_freq - Number of songs where a word appeared anywhere.
3. word_chorus - Number of times a word is used in a chorus.
4. song_chorus - Number of songs where a word appeared in the chorus.

|        	| word_freq 	| Count 	| song_freq 	| Count 	| word_chorus 	| Count 	| song_chorus 	| Count 	|
|:-------	|----------:	|------:	|----------:	|------:	|------------:	|------:	|------------:	|------:	|
| Top 1  	| like      	| 418   	| like      	| 104   	| know        	| 169   	| like        	| 40    	|
| Top 2  	| know      	| 407   	| know      	| 98    	| like        	| 158   	| know        	| 36    	|
| Top 3  	| never     	| 309   	| cause     	| 76    	| never       	| 153   	| cause       	| 33    	|
| Top 4  	| love      	| 238   	| never     	| 72    	| love        	| 116   	| never       	| 31    	|
| Top 5  	| time      	| 225   	| time      	| 70    	| cause       	| 106   	| love        	| 28    	|
| Top 6  	| cause     	| 208   	| back      	| 69    	| back        	| 103   	| back        	| 24    	|
| Top 7  	| back      	| 206   	| one       	| 66    	| think       	| 94    	| time        	| 24    	|
| Top 8  	| one       	| 182   	| say       	| 64    	| ever        	| 91    	| one         	| 23    	|
| Top 9  	| think     	| 180   	| see       	| 61    	| one         	| 90    	| baby        	| 23    	|
| Top 10 	| see       	| 173   	| love      	| 58    	| time        	| 84    	| go          	| 19    	|

**Table 5.** Terms like "know" and "like" always appeared in the top two positions.

What we conclude about the table? That the duality of "like" is apparent in her writings. She implicitly emphasized that we have affection and attraction to things or people that are similar to us. Also, from her perspective, maybe love itself is not words whispered like nobody knows but to be lived as an experience. 

What words can describe her vulnerability the most? We counted the most frequent words for each track 5 in the album.

| Words        	| Top 1    	| Top 2   	| Top 3    	| Top 4    	| Top 5     	| Top 6 	| Top 7   	| Top 8    	| Top 9    	| Top 10   	|
|--------------	|----------	|---------	|----------	|----------	|-----------	|-------	|---------	|----------	|----------	|----------	|
| All Tracks   	| stay     	| cause   	| like     	| know     	| see       	| want  	| could   	| delicate 	| right    	| never    	|
| Taylor Swift 	| never    	| away    	| shame    	| rainy    	| ending    	| given 	| perfect 	| day      	| sitting  	| thinking 	|
| Fearless     	| late     	| white   	| horse    	| princess 	| fairytale 	| small 	| town    	| catch    	| sorry    	| cause    	|
| Speak Now    	| think    	| young   	| see      	| shoulda  	| known     	| dear  	| john    	| gone     	| messed   	| girl     	|
| Red          	| remember 	| cause   	| well     	| like     	| 'bout     	| lost  	| long    	| maybe    	| home     	| scarf    	|
| 1989         	| stay     	| hey     	| like     	| want     	| say       	| back  	| let     	| people   	| palm     	| hand     	|
| reputation   	| delicate 	| cause   	| like     	| cool     	| said      	| know  	| make    	| never    	| want     	| chill    	|
| Lover        	| right    	| see     	| could    	| stay     	| combat    	| cause 	| help    	| hold     	| archer   	| prey     	|
| folklore     	| go       	| cursing 	| name     	| wishing  	| stayed    	| grace 	| look    	| tears    	| ricochet 	| want     	|
| evermore     	| watch    	| tell    	| tolerate 	| sit      	| head      	| much  	| got     	| wrong    	| somehow  	| know     	|

**Table 6.** Verbs are the most frequent terms in her track fives.

Is there "love" in her most emotionally vulnerable tracks? Maybe not much in words, but in actions (words). 

We have done the first part of the analysis. Hence, we need to measure how verbose her works are. We defined the `lexical uniqueness` as the **ratio of number of unique words used to the number of words in a song**. It ranged from zero to one whereas a song with a ratio closer to one is shown proximity to verbosity. The `apply`, `groupby`, and `idxmin` functions are helpful in observing the extreme values and aggregative the respective measures of central tendency such as "mean" and "variance". It has been done to all lyrics and all chorus, separately. 

To help the reader navigate the table below, here are the following definitions.

1. most_verbose - Most verbose lyrics
2. most_chorus - Most verbose chorus
3. least_verbose - Least verbose lyrics
4. least_chorus- Least verbose chorus

| Album        	| most_verbose                          	| score    	| most_chorus                            	| score    	| least_verbose            	| score    	| least_chorus             	| score    	|
|:-------------	|:--------------------------------------	|---------:	|:--------------------------------------	|---------:	|:-------------------------	|---------:	|:-------------------------	|---------:	|
| Taylor Swift 	| mary's song (oh my my my)             	| 0.693 	| mary's song (oh my my my)              	| 0.809 	| a perfectly good heart   	| 0.305 	| a perfectly good heart   	| 0.141 	|
| Fearless     	| the best day                          	| 0.765 	| the best day                           	| 0.667 	| forever & always         	| 0.443 	| breathe                  	| 0.143 	|
| Speak Now    	| dear john                             	| 0.671 	| mine                                   	| 0.387 	| haunted                  	| 0.451 	| mean                     	| 0.167 	|
| Red          	| all too well                          	| 0.730 	| all too well                           	| 0.811 	| the last time            	| 0.306 	| the lucky one            	| 0.109 	|
| 1989         	| clean                                 	| 0.510 	| wildest dreams                         	| 0.260 	| shake it off             	| 0.228 	| out of the woods         	| 0.031 	|
| reputation   	| this is why we can't have nice things 	| 0.526 	| new year's day                         	| 0.426 	| look what you made me do 	| 0.330 	| look what you made me do 	| 0.045 	|
| Lover        	| it's nice to have a friend            	| 0.775 	| miss americana & the heartbreak prince 	| 0.333 	| i think he knows         	| 0.365 	| soon you'll get better   	| 0.105 	|
| folklore     	| invisible string                      	| 0.763 	| cardigan                               	| 0.837 	| august                   	| 0.350 	| epiphany                 	| 0.238 	|
| evermore     	| champagne problems                    	| 0.783 	| champagne problems                     	| 0.638 	| willow                   	| 0.418 	| marjorie                 	| 0.098 	|

**Table 7.** `champagne problems` from `evermore` is the most verbose among her work while `Shake It Off` from `1989` is the least.

To show how her words have changed, a scatterplot of the ratio was created. 


{% include ts_lyric_ratios_scatter.html %}

**Figure 15.** The bottom left of the scatter plot has tracks from `1989` while the upper right has track fives or songs from `folklore`.

From the scatter plot itself, the tracks in `1989` and `folklore` can be separated by a line. It is evident by the network of writers earlier since Max Martin and Aaron Dessner never worked together for a track. Furthermore, they are both producers hence, the music can easily translate from the writings. To check how the verbosity of lyrics and choruses have changed from album to album, the animation counterpart is needed.


{% include ts_lyric_ratios_move.html %}

**Figure 16.** The spread of the verbosities have widen from `Speak Now` to `Red`.

In her first album, the verbosity scores occupy both extremes as `A Perfectly Good Heart`, the only song written and produced by Brett James and Troy Verges is located in the bottom left while songs such as `Mary's Song`, `Teardrops on My Guitar` and `Cold as You` are in the upper right. Compared to the previous album, tracks from `Fearless` have higher verbosities and still, a track five called `White Horse` is in the upper right quadrant. As `Speak Now` is released, the cohesion is more evident as the both chorus and lyric verbosities have the smallest spread among her album so far. Again, `Dear John`, another track number five, is an outlier among them. In this case, there is a difference between what is a track number five and not.

`Red`, arguably her best album, had included more radio-friendly songs with the help of Max Martin and gave rise to the fan-favorite `All Too Well`, which has the highest lyric and chorus verbosity among other track fives so far. Hence, the spread has widen for both verbosities and it garnered the highest variances among all albums. The songs in `1989` is significantly different from the others for one, she have worked with more writers than the previous albums. Two, the verbosities have moved to the lower quadrant. In fact **five** least verbose tracks in her discography were in the mentioned album. Even `All You Had To Do Was Stay` did not stand out among other tracks. 

The streak of low chorus verbosities and a non-outstanding track five continued in `reputation`. When `Lover` came, the verbosities have significantly increased as Max Martin and Shellback were gone from the writing and production credits. The lyrics are as cohesive as the sound. Even her most danceable and positive-sounding track, `Paper Rings` have better verbosities than **6** tracks, including `All You Had To Do Was Stay`, from `1989`. As she moved to `folklore`, the bulk of the tracks were written with more unique terms as shown by the violin plot below.


{% include ts_disco_lyrics_ratio.html %}
**Figure 17.** Although having similar distribution, the median and mean moved upward between `Lover` and `folklore`.

Finally, `evermore` has `champagne problem`, her song with most verbose words. Also, `my tears ricochet` from `folklore` and `tolerate it` stood as outliers among their co-tracks. Over-all, the lyrics from both albums burrowed under our skins the things that should be over. 

At the end of everything, our shared experiences with Taylor Swift through her words may tell us that there is no other sadness the world will do and we couldn't be for sure. The truth is this pain wouldn't last for evermore. One day, we gotta step into the daylight.

